All right, so the first type of collection we're going to learn about is a list, so lists are very
similar to arrays in terms of their functionality.
We've used the phrase a few times in the past where we've created strings or numbers or even objects,
and we can store them in an array.
Lists are much the same.
The primary reason for using a list is that we want to collect a bunch of objects usually so that we
can iterate over them later or so that we can pass them around.
From method to method or something along those lines.
So lists are great for storing lots of objects and specifically for storing them in order.
OK.
That is the main distinction of a list versus some of the other types of collections that we will look
at.
Lists are intended to allow us to store objects in order.
Now, list itself is an interface, as I have already mentioned.
And as such, you cannot create specifically a list.
You need to create an instance of a class that implements the list interface.
Two of the fairly well known implementations of the list interface are linked list and array list.
These are actual classes that we can instantiate of the two.
I would say for sure.
Array list is the most popular.
Most developers, if they just need a generic collection to store a bunch of objects, then usually
will just automatically go with the array list without really analyzing or thinking.
I'm not saying that's necessarily a bad thing.
I'm just saying that's how popular it is, is it?
It tends to be everybody's go to collection type.
So Array List actually uses an array internally in its implementation.
Thus, the name.
Now you may be wondering, well, what's the difference between just using an actual array versus using
this array list thing?
And I would say the biggest difference would probably have to be the fact that with a traditional array,
you must initialize its size when you're creating it.
And once you've initialized its size, you cannot change that size.
So if you think you're going to need an array that holds 10 strings and you create and initialize it
to hold 10 strings and then later on, for some reason you realize you need to add two more.
You need to actually add 12 strings to it.
You're out of luck with that particular array.
You'll likely just need to create a bigger array and then store all 12 strings in that newer array or
something along those lines.
However, with lists and array lists in particular, lists are able to grow or shrink dynamically.
And so when we create an instance of a list, we don't need to specify its size beforehand.
It will grow dynamically as needed, or it may even shrink dynamically as needed as well.
And so that is one of the biggest functional differences between array lists and just regular plain
old arrays.
Additionally, lists can only hold objects, not primitives.
So arrays, as you may recall, can be used to store primitive numbers.
Lists cannot do that.
Everything that goes into a list has to be an actual object.
This isn't actually that big of a deal in terms of usability, though, because if you want to store
numbers in a list, for example, you can simply wrap them inside of the numeric wrapper classes first
and then you can go.
Now, of course, because the wrapper classes are objects, they do take up more memory and they are
heavier weight.
But it does give you a way to use lists to store numbers.
So let's turn to the code here.
We're still working in the employees project because it will actually serve as a very good project for
us to play around with collections seeing as how we have already here.
Basically, a list of people.
So what we're going to do is we're going to experiment with changing the way that we are totaling up
the salaries and we will make use of a list to do this instead.
So the first thing to know is, well, how do we create a list?
So what we're going to do is we're going to create a collection.
And for every employee that's getting created inside of this loop, we'll take that employee and add
them to the collection.
And in this case, the collection will be a list.
And then after we've added all of the employees to this new collection, we can play with that collection
and see what kinds of things we can do with it.
So the first thing we need to do is to actually create an instance of a collection or specifically of
a list.
So we need to create that instance above this while loop.
Can you think of why?
Well, the reason is because if we're going to be adding employees to the list, if we create the list
inside of the while loop, then that list will keep getting re initialized and we'll never be accumulating
all of the employee objects.
So let's let me show you how we'll do this.
So we'll I'll make a new line above the beginning of this loop, like so.
And to create an actual instance of a list, we just use the new operator as we would when we create
any other type of object.
Now, keep in mind, we can't say new list because list is an interface and you cannot instantiate an
interface.
So we need to instantiate one of the classes that implements the list interface.
And I mentioned earlier that the two most popular ones are array list and linked list.
So I'm going to go for array list as it is the most popular.
OK.
And so we can do this now.
Normally, when we create an object instance, we type new and then the class type and then parentheses
like this.
And I'll import this class right now because it's in red, so I'm going to do an option return to import
that.
And then a semicolon.
So that's normally how you would create any object.
Now I'm going to show you in a moment, though, that this isn't the recommended way to do this, but
I will come right back to this in just a moment.
All right.
So normally from here, we then want to store this instance in a variable.
So if I do a option command V to create a variable?
All right.
The I.D..
Generates a little bit of code on the left side of the equals, first look at what the ad does.
It already knows that I want to store this instance not in a variable of type ArrayList, but in a variable
of type list.
If you recall from, I think, the last lesson in the previous module, I mentioned briefly that we
should generally prefer to store instances in a more generic type.
Or maybe I can say another way we should prefer to store object instances in interfaces, at least if
there is a logical interface that can represent the functionality that we need from that object.
So in the case of ArrayList, it does implement the list interface.
And so it's a smart move to store instances of array lists inside of variables of type list rather than
variables of type array list.
You'll see why this is actually a very good idea in just a little bit.
All right.
So the ADC already chose the list interface for me.
I don't know for a fact that it will do the same for you on your computer.
It may be because they've already played around with this a little bit.
So be careful if you do generate a variable to hold an instance of the array list, make sure that that
variable instances of type list.
All right.
And then the next thing I need to do is to name my variable.
So this variable is going to be holding on to the employees.
And so I'm inclined to just call it employees, plural, because my intention is to store multiple employees
in it.
And so I will make it plural.
And then I will hit return.
All right.
So with this, I can store employees right now.
And in fact, I'm going to go ahead and do that to show you how to use this in the in the most straightforward
way.
So we've got this list that can hold employees, and I didn't need to say anything like how big it needs
to be or anything like that.
So now down here in the while loop, we've got line thirty eight where we create employee objects and
those get spat out right here and stored temporarily into this employee variable.
So what I could do now is make a new line and then I can reference the employees list like so and then
I can call one of the list methods, which is add.
And then I can simply add this new employee created on Line 38.
Like so and it's just that easy to do this.
Now let me show you what's wrong with this code so that you have an appreciation for it.
This will work, by the way.
This will work.
I won't get any errors if I run this code.
OK.
However, let me show you something that's bad.
Now, if I make another line, I can reference the employees list again.
And I can call and again, and this time, though, I can pass in a string.
Now, look at that.
That.
That's also being allowed.
Do you see what the problem is here?
All right, so the problem is that.
This list is allowing me to store different types of objects.
This object is an object of type I employee, which is an interface.
This object here is a string.
These are obviously totally different types of objects.
And the problem with this is that later on, I may want to write some code where I loop over all of
the items that I stored in this list and do something like summing up their salaries right by calling
get salary.
Well, that's going to blow up if I happen to encounter an object that is different from the employee
object, for example.
So in the earlier versions of Java, this kind of code was completely permitted, and there wasn't a
great way to protect one's self from making mistakes like this storing objects of different types in
your collections.
However, eventually a new feature was added to Java to help protect us from making this kind of mistake.
And the new feature is called generics.
So with generics, we're able to not only create a collection and then store objects in it.
We're actually able to specify to Java what type of objects we actually intend to store in that collection.
And by specifying that at the time that we are creating the instance, the I-D and Java in general can
protect us from doing dumb things like this.
And so to use generics here to specify what type of objects we're going to be storing in here, all
I need to do is put my cursor here on the list here and I'm going to use special symbols.
The less than and greater than symbol, which together are called the diamond operator and inside and
in-between these two symbols, I can simply specify a type a data type that I want to allow to be stored
in this collection.
So in this case, again, I employee recreate employee returns, objects of type I employee.
So here if I type, I employee like, so look at what happens.
Suddenly, Line 40 goes in error, and if I hover over it, I get a message saying the required type
should be an employee.
But I provided a string.
And so now my ID is warning me that I'm trying to add an object of a data type that is incompatible
with this particular collection.
And that's great because otherwise I wouldn't have discovered this until I did something dumb while
I was actually running the program at runtime, as we would call it.
And by that point, it's too late to do much about it.
So you'd rather catch this kind of mistake while you're writing the code and not while you're running
the code.
So I'm going to delete that line now.
Now there's one other thing that I should do.
I was able to specify the type of objects that I want to store in this variable, but I can also make
sure that Java knows what types of objects are going to be used when it's creating this array list in
the first place.
Now you might think that I should just do the same thing here like I employee and I can, I can do that.
However, even newer versions of Java have helped us out a little bit to not have to be so redundant.
You know, if we're already saying we want to store it, we want to work with our employees for the
list here.
Why should we have to say it again here?
And in fact, if you notice this word, I employee on the right hand side is in gray.
That's because that's telling us it's redundant information.
It says the explicit type argument I employee can be replaced with just the diamond operator itself.
So.
We can actually just remove those words.
And so now what we're what we're basically telling Java is create a new ArrayList that adheres to generics,
but we don't have to specify what the data type is for the generic.
It will infer that based on what I said over here on the left side, OK, so this is called type inference
because it's able to infer based on the total context of what we're saying here.
And so that basically, again, just saves us a little bit of typing.
If you may recall, I also mentioned in a previous lesson.
A lot of the newest features that are being added to Java tend to boil down to one main theme, which
is How can we allow you to do more with less typing?
And so here's another example of that doing more with less typing.
All right.
So now what we will end up with is a bunch of employees being added to this collection called employees.
What can we do next with it?
Well, one thing we could do now, I'm not saying this makes a lot of sense to do, by the way, but
here's one thing we could do we could do no additional processing inside of this loop.
So it could be like the purpose of this first loop is simply to create a bunch of employee objects and
store them in this collection.
OK.
But then we could have another loop where we loop over all of the objects in this collection and then
we do all of the totaling and everything.
Now, obviously, in this particular case, it doesn't make a lot of sense to do it, but I'm going
to do it this way so that I have an excuse to show you yet another cool feature of loops.
So you have learned how to make for loops in the past.
And I'll remind you of what the format for for loop is.
We do four and then we can define and initialize a variable in the first section of the for loop like.
So let's say that we want to count up to 10 so I could create an integer and give it a name like counter,
and I can initialize it to a number like zero and then I can use a semicolon.
And then in the second section of the for loop, I can specify a criteria for how long this loop should
keep going.
So I can say something like while counter is less than 10, for example, and then in the final section
of the loop, I can specify how to increment the counter so I can simply say something like counter
+ +.
And then I have my loop body here, and so then I can do something right and I can even reference this
counter thing so I could print out the counter value, for example, or if I had an array, I could
use the counter here to access the elements of the array.
So I could say something like array counter right, and then I can.
And then I could pull data out of the array, or I could put data in the array data going in like so
right if I had an array.
OK, well now I can teach you another form of for loop.
And this form of the for loop is specifically designed for use with collections, and it's really,
really convenient.
And so the way we do that, I'm going to delete this for loop here and I'm going to do four again.
All right.
So the next thing I need to do, just as with the other version of the for loop, I need to specify
a variable in which we're going to hold on to the employees as we're looping over them.
So since I'm going to be using that variable to hold an employee one at a time temporarily, my data
type will be I employee.
And then I need a name.
Now I need to be careful because I've got an employee variable right up here, but I was using this
one in the context of this loop here.
And so I don't want to reuse that particular one.
So down here, I'm going to create another variable and I'm I guess I'm going to just call it worker
just to keep it, you know, kind of out of the way of this other one here.
Now the next thing we do in a in the traditional for a loop, we would then use a semicolon and then
specify like some kind of a statement that states how long we should be looping, like counter while
counter is less than 10 or something like that.
But for this enhanced form of loop, we use a colon instead.
And then all we have to do is tell it the name of a collection variable.
So we've got a collection variable right here, employees.
So I can reference that just like so and then I can just create the body of a loop.
And so what this is saying is take the individual employees that are inside of this employee's collection
and loop over them.
And for each employee, store it in this variable, which I happen to be calling worker.
OK, so this is the standard pattern for how to use a for loop to iterate over a collection.
And so from here, I can just use these workers to do something.
So at this point, I could do pretty much what we were doing before.
So in fact, I'm going to just copy these two lines come down here, paste, fix my formatting a bit.
And instead of using the word employee, I will now use the word worker and I'll do the same here.
There we go.
And then everything else should be exactly the same.
And in fact, let's go ahead and delete these two lines, and then I'm going to run the code and confirm
that that still works.
Yep, 8.6 million.
There we go, so that's still working.
Now, as I mentioned before, there's no real point on this program.
There's no real point in actually doing this using two loops that's just going to make the program take
longer.
The only reason I'm showing you it in this way is because there's a typical pattern that in one part
of a program, we will populate a collection with some data.
And then in some other part of the program, we will iterate over the data in that collection to process
it in some way.
And so that's really all I'm showing you here, populating the collection and then processing the collection
in some way.
OK.
And then also introducing you to this pattern of using the enhanced for loop to iterate over a collection.
Now, there are actually a couple other ways to iterate over collections that we will look at shortly,
but this is usually the best and most popular way to do it.
All right, so let's end this lesson, and in the next lesson, I will show you more things that we
can do with lists.